---
title: A Neat Way to Store Colours
date: 2023-05-13 16:00:00 -0800
categories: [software, tutorial]
tags: [union, cpp]    # tag names should always be lowercase
---

# A Neat Way to Store Colours

## Motivation

There are two methods to represent a colour, we can either use the RGB code or we can use the HEX code.
The first way is to store the red value, the green value, and the blue value of the color into an array of size 3.
The second approach is to store the hexadecimal value of the color.
For the computer, both methods are essentially the same since the underlying values are in 0's and 1's.
However, sometimes we prefer one method over the another and sometimes the other way around.
In this post, we will introduce a data structure called *union* to store the color and we can switch between those two formats effortlessly.

## Union

The union data structure in C++/C is similar to the struct data structure.
Unlike a struct, which holds all its data members, a union only holds one of its data members at a time.
So for instance, if we declare a *char* and an *int*, then both *char* and *int* will occupy the same memory address.
And the compiler will allocate a size of 4 bytes since *int* takes up 4 bytes.
This has a benefit in terms of memory efficiency and the user can access the desired type of the member in the union.

## Implementation

We declare a *struct* that has two members, a *bool* that indicates whether the colour is represented in the hexadecimal code or not.
And the second member is of type anonymous union with an array and an unsigned int. The array stores the values of red, green, and blue.
And the unsigned int stores the hexadecimal value of the colour.

```c++
struct Colour
{
    bool isHex;
    
    // an anonymous union that only store one of those members
    union
    {
        uint8_t rgb[3]; // for RGB
        uint32_t hex;   // for hex
    };
};
```

We can create a function that print out the colour. We want to have different formats for different code.
Therefore, the first thing the function does is to check whether the colour is described in the hexadecimal code.
If it is, then the function just access the *hex* member in the union and output the value.
If not, then the function access the *rgb* array and format the values in seqeunce.
This is the function that does that.

```c++
void PrintColour(const Colour& c)
{
    // check if the data is represented in the hex code
    if (c.isHex)
        std::cout << "The colour in hex form is: " << std::hex << c.hex << "\n";
    else
    {
        char buffer[50];    // a char array that stores the string
        // format the output string
        sprintf(buffer, "(%u, %u, %u)", c.rgb[0], c.rgb[1], c.rgb[2]);
        printf("The colour in RGB form is:  %s", buffer);
    }
}
```

And here are two demos that illustrate the usage.

```c++
int main()
{
    Colour coral;
    coral.isHex = true;
    coral.hex = 0xFF7F50;

    Colour azure;
    azure.isHex = false;
    azure.rgb[0] = 240;
    azure.rgb[1] = 255;
    azure.rgb[2] = 255;

    // print those two colours
    PrintColour(coral);
    PrintColour(azure);

    return 0;
}
```

The expected output should be like this:

```bash
>The colour in hex form is: ff7f50
>The colour in RGB form is:  (240, 255, 255)
```


## Summary

In this post, we learn that we can use *union* to store the information of the colour in two different ways.

Happy coding 😀

## Acknowledgement

Those are the sources where I learn:
1. [union](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/union)
1. [sprintf](https://cplusplus.com/reference/cstdio/sprintf/)


